I want you to hit me as hard as you can
hi I'm Luke Ryan for Joe Blow calm and
welcome to movie endings explain where
we'll be taking a look at someone the
more ambiguous and discussed movie
endings that have left audiences
debating their true meaning long after
the credits have rolled this time on
movie endings explained we're going to
be looking at the 2001 Cameron Crowe
film Vanilla Sky starring Tom Cruise
fresh off big success working together
on Jerry Maguire the director and actor
team were keen to make another film
though something wildly different from
Jerry Maguire it was Tom Cruise who saw
the 1997 spanish film open your eyes and
eagerly showed it to crowe they decided
to remake it
although Cameron Crowe likes to use the
term remix and insists that Vanilla Sky
is a companion piece likening the two
films to songs
with open your eyes being the classical
music original and Vanilla Sky it's rock
companion piece
the story follows David Ames the rich
owner of a publishing firm in New York
who inherited the company and lives out
a bachelor lifestyle after a fairly
standard introduction to David we
suddenly cut to him telling his life
story to court psychologist dr. McCabe
played by Kurt Russell David is being
charged for murder and is wearing a
prosthetic mask to cover his face we
retraced the steps of his recent past to
find him falling in love with Sophia
played by Penelope Cruz after he's
introduced to her by his author friend
Bryan Shelby Cruz also played Sophia in
the original film open your eyes David's
newfound love with Sophia doesn't sit
too well with his possessive former
partner Julie who traps him in the
passenger seat of her car and drives it
off a bridge
Julie dies and David is left severely
disfigured practically ruining his life
for a man so proud of his own image he
can't bear to be seen by anyone and even
has the mirrors removed from his home
eventually he works up the courage to
face Sophia again they go out with Bryan
and David gets blind drunk and ends up
left alone to wallow in the streets when
he wakes up the following morning Sophia
has returned to him and they become a
couple again David undergoes plastic
surgery and has his face surgically
repaired as if the accident had never
happened for a while things seem perfect
but he begins to have nightmares that
his face has become disfigured again and
he meets a strange man in a bar who
tells David he can control everyone if
he wanted to one day Julie returns
insisting to David that she is Sophia he
soon finds mementos and photographs of
Sophia replaced with Julie's face unable
to tell what's real or fiction and who
is Sophia or Julie
David smothers and kills Julie or was it
Sophia after David's session with dr.
McCabe ends he is taken to a company
called L II or Life Extension
here he learns that he has in fact been
cryogenically frozen a service he opted
into
his mindset inside a lucid dream after
he killed himself from the point that he
woke up after the drunken night out is
the life extension lucid dream kicking
in and replacing anything real that
happened afterwards the first real clue
that everything after that is a lucid
dream is really in the vanilla sky
itself above David and Sophia as they
walk away down the street a detail that
David pointed out Sofia earlier in the
film on a Monet painting that is the
real thing his paintbrush painted the
vanilla sky my mother's but the lucid
dream was not going to life extensions
plan as David's subconscious started
losing grip on the reality of the
unreality his mind was initially tricked
into believing was real elements of
movies he'd watched an iconography that
had stuck with him throughout his entire
life informed the lucid dream as it
began to morph into something different
and so the conclusion of the film David
is given a choice by the mysterious man
he met earlier at the bar Ventura or
tech supports to either be reinserted
into the correct lucid dream or to wake
up David has been frozen for a hundred
and fifty years and has given the option
to take a literal leap of faith off the
top of a building to jolt himself back
into reality David's fear of heights is
the key trigger to help him on his way
to break free from the lucid dream after
he realizes that most of his romance
with Sophia was imaginary and merely the
beginning stages of the planned perfect
reimagining of his life David decides to
take the leap
[Music]
relax David open your eyes
the film doesn't offer us anything post
lucid dream beyond David's eye and the
confirmation that he did manage to wake
up in reality if you choose to believe
that he did that is and here's the main
interest in vanilla Sky's ending while
it's a mind-bending film web of the
audience and David are questioning
what's real more and more as it
progresses by the end the story is laid
out in a fairly straightforward manner
there are some clues along the way such
as the previously mentioned anti chiller
Vanilla Sky but also how perfectly
things go for David right after he wakes
up in the streets previously there was
no hope to reconstruct his face and yet
suddenly it's doable and he's fixed
perfectly yes Cameron Crowe welcomes
interpretation to proceedings and at one
point stated there are five ways to view
the ending of the film without going
into specifics one is of course at face
value believing everything you were
shown from the beginning of the film to
the very end another is that age-old
theory it was all the dream I mean the
title of the movie is Vanilla Sky which
is a device in the film to explain why
David was dreaming could it be that the
whole film was a dream - maybe as both a
nod to the original film but also a
recurring theme throughout Vanilla Sky
the words
open your eyes are spoken to David
multiple times David's car also has a
registration day of the 30th of February
2001 a day that doesn't exist
however Cameron Crowe has explained that
that was an accident
but all the same a happy one
serendipitous fuel to the fire but I
don't personally find this answer very
satisfying or more importantly all that
interesting it was all a dream just
feels phoned in as an idea another
theory is that vanilla sky is actually
Brian Shelby's book while brian is
David's best friend he also judges him
at times and at one point tells David he
will never know the pain of being the
guy who goes home alone the borderline
aggressively vain David gets completely
stripped down throughout Vanilla Sky
both physically and emotionally
learns lessons that Brian would no doubt
want David to face in a way it would be
Brian putting David through a revenge if
this were the case
Brian would also be living vicariously
through David and writing this story for
as much as he chastises David at times
he too would like to be the guy who
doesn't go home alone I like the outside
of the box thinking of the film being
Brian's book but it also feels like it's
trying too hard as a theory you could
also look at vanilla sky as the portrait
of a clinically insane man up to a point
the events of the story could be real
with David under psychiatric evaluation
from dr. McCabe but when it gets to the
point where no more time is left and
David begins to bang on the glass in the
interrogation room his mind slips into
complete delusional fantasy yet another
angle is viewing the story as David's
hallucinatory dream following the car
crash stuck in a coma and building a
continuation of his life inside his mind
one that rapidly descends into nonsense
that being said the tantalizing idea of
Vanilla Sky being taken more face value
ending on the concept of David awakening
in 21:51 to see a completely different
world or not is still the most
intriguing to me though I love the idea
of viewing a film like this in different
ways shaped by your own experiences and
ideals and even faith in 2015 Vanilla
Sky was released on blu-ray including an
alternate ending though it doesn't offer
any earth-shattering differences dr.
McCabe keeps pleading to David to not
jump off the building and as David is
about to hit the ground he shouts that
he wants to wake up the only real
significant difference as far as the
very ending of the film is concerned is
perhaps the final line of dialogue which
is slightly different take a listen
followed by the final theatrical version
[Music]
open your eyes David I'm gonna be fine
relax David open your eyes I'm not quite
sure what to make of the differences
there in the lines of dialogue whether
it's a different voice whether that
means anything I'll leave that to you to
read into if you feel like you Cameron
Crowe has said a lot of things about
Vanilla Sky never shy to talk about his
work but the most important and key
quote about the ending of the film from
him is this as deep as you want to go
with it my desire was for the movie to
meet you there what did you think of the
ending of Vanilla Sky do you take the
story at face value or do you dive
deeper into the possibilities of its
finale let us know down below and thanks
for watching
[Music]